The MM2 optimization tool in Chem 3D is perhaps the most widely utilized computational tool among chemists. However, it is a fifty years old model with constraints dictated by the assumptions of force fields. As an example, if we optimize the Grubbs II catalyst with MM2, we can see that the geometry around both the carbene center and the Ruthenium atom are incorrect, which is caused by incorrect assignment of atom types and missing parameters.

This tool integrates xTB into Chem3D by adapting the MOPAC menu, allowing users to optimize geometries with xTB. We can see that qualitatively accurate geometries around both the carbene center and the Ruthenium atom can be obtained.

Another limitation of M M force fields is their inability to handle topological changes, as the energies have different references. For example, when optimizing conjugated and non-conjugated cyclohexenones with MM2, the result is qualitatively wrong. In contrast, when calculated with xTB, the results are qualitatively accurate, predicting several kcal/mol of conjugation stabilization energy.

The xTB program is also capable of generating molecular orbitals, a feature that has been integrated into our tool via cube files generated by Multi w f n. We demonstrate this with another example, the dicobalt octacarbonyl, if we first optimize the structure, once again, MM2 fails to provide a reasonable result. We use xTB instead. In this tab, you can modify the overall charge for the xTB optimization, as well as adjust the multiplicity and computation level. We can see that the optimized geometry is qualitatively accurate. Following optimization, the Orbital Viewer panel will open. It displays the energy of frontier orbitals. By selecting any of the buttons, the corresponding orbital will be displayed in Chem 3D. Here is the LUMO of dicobalt octacarbonyl, You can clearly see the pi star orbitals of the ligands.

 Here is another example with the molecular orbitals of benzene. Similarly, we first optimize the structure. In the poped up orbital viewer panel, we click the HOMO button, we see the shape of the occupied pi 3 orbital. And now the unoccupied pi 4 orbital with one more node, and now the pi 6 orbital with the 12 lobs. Chem3D have a toolbar called "surfaces", you can use the corresponding buttons to customize the color, isovalue, and display mode of the orbitals.